Forests, importance and classification.
Forests are complex ecosystems that play a vital
role in human life.
They cover about 31% of the world's
land surface and perform various functions including oxygen
production, air purification, water supply and other natural
resources, making them very important for maintaining the
health and balance of the planet.
The classification of forests is based on different
criteria, such as the climatic zone in which
they are located, the type of vegetation that
makes them up or their ecological function.
In relation to the climatic zone, forests are
divided into tropical, subtropical, temperate and boreal.
Of these, tropical zones stand out for having
the largest proportion of forests worldwide, reaching 45%,
while the rest is distributed among the other
climatic zones.
World distribution of forests by climatic zone, 45
% tropical, 27% boreal, 16% temperate,
1, 1% subtropical.
Geographic connection.
About 54% of the world's forests are
concentrated in five nations, Russia, Brazil, Canada, the
United States and China.
Characteristics of tropical forests.
Tropical forests are located in the intertropical zone
and constitute one of the most important ecosystems
worldwide.
They are characterized by their warm and humid
climate and experience abundant rainfall throughout the year,
creating favorable conditions for plant and animal life.
In addition, they stand out for harboring an
astonishing biological diversity, with approximately 60% of
the known species of fauna and flora worldwide.
However, in recent decades, deforestation has seriously threatened
the health and stability of these forests, affecting
entire regions.
Main issues facing tropical forests.
Tropical forests, despite their ecological importance, face various
issues that put their existence at risk.
Deforestation.
The process by which forest cover is removed
or reduced on a large scale in a
given area.
It can be caused by human or natural
activities.
Pollution.
Occurs when chemical agents that alter the forest
ecosystem are introduced, such as waste dumping and
industrial emissions.
Climate change.
Significant variation in climate patterns that affects tropical
forests, causing droughts, fires, and floods.
Overexploitation.
Excessive logging and exploitation of forest resources without
sustainable practices deplete resources and threaten natural regeneration.
The impact of productive activities on deforestation.
In a recent study, the FAO concluded that
between 2000 and 2018, almost 90% of
deforestation in tropical areas was related to agriculture,
52.3% was due to the expansion
of cropland, and 37.5% to the
expansion of livestock grazing land.
Cropland caused more than 75% of deforestation
in Africa and Asia.
The most important cause in South America and
Oceania was livestock grazing.
Regions affected by deforestation.
The regions most affected by deforestation in tropical
areas are located in South America, Central Africa,
and Southeast Asia.
In South America, deforestation is concentrated in the
Amazon, which is the largest tropical forest in
the world.
In Africa, the Congo rainforest is threatened by
the expansion of agriculture, livestock, and mining.
In Asia, deforestation occurs mainly in Indonesia, Malaysia,
and Myanmar, due to oil palm cultivation and
overexploitation of wood for the paper industry.
The conversion of tropical forests into agricultural plantations
for the production of commercial crops, such as
soy and oil palm, remains the most significant
cause of deforestation worldwide.
Soy is mainly used as feed for cattle,
pigs, and poultry, and as an ingredient in
processed products.
African or oil palm is cultivated to obtain
palm oil, which is a common compound in
many foods and cosmetic products.
The expansion of land for grazing and livestock,
as well as the paper industry and illegal
timber extraction, which is often destined for international
markets, also increases forest degradation, and ultimately, the
risk of their disappearance.
South America Deforestation is concentrated in the Amazon,
the largest tropical forest in the world.
According to WWF, 18% of Amazonian forests
have been completely lost, and another 17%
is degraded due to large-scale soy cultivation
and the expansion of land for grazing.
Central Africa The Congo River Basin, 3.7
million square kilometers, is the second-largest tropical
zone.
The main cause is subsistence agriculture, followed by
forestry and mining operations.
Southeast Asia Palm oil production is the main
cause, especially in Indonesia and Malaysia, which together
produce 84% of the world's palm oil.
Timber activities for the paper industry also have
a significant impact.